---
layout: single
title:  "STUDY OF PRE-TREATMENT CLONAL DIVERSITY IN HIGH-GRADE SEROUS OVARIAN CANCER PUBLISHED"
date:   2013-07-19
categories: ['Dr. Sohrab Shah', Publications, Research]
tags: [discovery, 'ovarian cancer', sequencing, 'tumour evolution']
---
[J Pathol. 2013 Jun 18. doi: 10.1002/path.4230. [Epub ahead of print]](http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.4230/abstract)

Distinct evolutionary trajectories of primary high-grade serous ovarian cancers
revealed through spatial mutational profiling.

Bashashati A, Ha G, Tone A, Ding J, Prentice LM, Roth A, Rosner J, Shumansky K,
Kalloger S, Senz J, Yang W, McConechy M, Melnyk N, Anglesio M, Luk MT, Tse K,
Zeng T, Moore R, Zhao Y, Marra MA, Gilks B, Yip S, Huntsman DG, McAlpine JN, Shah
SP.

Department of Molecular Oncology, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver,
Canada.

High-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSC) is characterized by poor outcome, often
attributed to emergence of treatment-resistant sub-clones. We sought to measure
the degree of genomic diversity within primary, untreated HGSC to examine the
natural state of tumor evolution prior to therapy. We performed exome sequencing,
copy number analysis, targeted amplicon deep sequencing and gene expression
profiling on thirty-one spatially and temporally separated HGSC tumor specimens
(six patients) including ovarian masses, distant metastases, and fallopian tube
lesions. We found widespread intra-tumoral variation in mutation, copy number,
and gene expression profiles, with key driver alterations in genes present in
only a subset of samples (e.g. PIK3CA, CTNNB1, NF1). On average, only 51.5% of
mutations were present in every sample of a given case (range: 10.2%-91.4%), with
TP53 as the only somatic mutation consistently present in all samples. Complex
segmental aneuploidies, such as whole genome doubling, were present in a subset
of samples from the same individual, with divergent copy number changes
segregating independently of point mutation acquisition. Reconstruction of
evolutionary histories showed one patient with mixed HGSC and endometrioid
histology with common etiologic origin in the fallopian tube and subsequent
selection of different driver mutations in the histologically distinct samples.
In this patient, we observed mixed cell populations in the early fallopian tube
lesion, indicating diversity arises at early stages of tumorigenesis. Our results
reveal that HGSC exhibit highly individual evolutionary trajectories and diverse
genomic tapestries prior to therapy, exposing an essential biological
characteristic to inform future design of personalized therapeutic solutions and
investigation of drug resistance mechanisms.
